Kathryn_cottingham
Biology
nutrient_availability
Abstract

Many phytoplankton species have evolved induced defenses against herbivore grazers, but the effectiveness of, and costs associated with, these defenses may depend on environmental conditions. For example, grazer chemical cues (kairomones) induce colony formation in many phytoplankton, but temperature, light and nutrient availability can also affect colony size. Little is know about how kairomones and abiotic variables interact to induce algal defenses. Here, we investigate this interaction in the freshwater chlorophyte Scenedesmus acutus, which responds to kairomones from zooplankton herbivores and changes in the abiotic environment by forming colonies (coenobia) of up to eight cells. We tested the effects of ambient phosphorus concentration (0.5, 1.0 and 5.0 µM) and exposure to kairomones from the zooplankton herbivore Daphnia magna on S. acutus growth and coenobia formation. Daphnia magna kairomones did not affect S. acutus population growth during the exponential phase. While kairomones induced coenobia formation in all three P treatments, more coenobia were formed in the absence of kairomones in high-P treatments than in low-P treatments. Thus, coenobia formation appears to be a primarily constitutive defense when P is abundant, but an induced defense when P is scarce, suggesting a trade-off between coenobia formation and phosphorus availability in S. acutus.

Key words
kairomones phosphorus Daphnia magna coenobia phenotypic plasticity
Previous Section
Next Section
INTRODUCTION

Extreme and rapid phenotypic plasticity is common in phytoplankton, and can be triggered by a variety of abiotic and biotic environmental cues. For example, cell size (Tillberg and Rowley, 1989), cell wall thickness (Van Donk, 1997), reproductive rate (Rhee and Gotham 1981) and colony size (Peperzak, 1993; Lürling and Van Donk, 1999; Wiltshire and Lampert, 1999) can respond dramatically to temperature, nutrients, light and other abiotic factors. Moreover, many taxa exhibit induced defenses in response to chemical signals (kairomones) released by herbivores (Van Donk et al., 2011). While the interactive effects of biotic and abiotic factors on terrestrial plant defenses have generated a vast body of literature examining trade-offs between defense, growth and reproduction (e.g. Stamp, 2003), few studies have explored how biotic and abiotic variables interact to affect phytoplankton defenses (Lürling and Van Donk, 1999; Selander et al., 2008; Lundgren and Granéli, 2010). As freshwater ecosystems are currently experiencing physical and chemical perturbations from nutrient loading and global climate change, studying the interplay between abiotic factors and biotic chemical cues in aquatic systems is essential for understanding plankton species interactions, and for predicting how environmental change may affect plankton dynamics.

Colony (coenobia) size is a commonly studied plastic trait in phytoplankton, and the induction or suppression of coenobia formation is known to be an induced defense in many species. A diversity of marine (Peperzak, 1993; Wolfe et al., 1997; Tang, 2003; Long et al., 2007; Selander et al., 2008; Lundgren and Granéli, 2010; Selander et al., 2011) and freshwater (Trainor, 1964; Gavis et al., 1979; Hessen and Van Donk, 1993; Van Donk and Hessen, 1993; Van Donk, 2007, Van Donk et al., 2011) taxa change from a unicellular to a colonial state (and vice versa) in response to their abiotic environment or to the presence/absence of certain herbivore grazers. Coenobia size can range from two to four cells in some species, such as Scenedesmus obliquus (Trainor, 1964) and Alexandrium tamarense (Selander et al., 2011), to hundreds or even thousands in others, such as Phaeocystis sp. (Rousseau et al., 1990).

Freshwater chlorophytes of the genus Scenedesmus are model organisms for studies of phytoplankton phenotypic plasticity (Trainor, 1964; Steenbergen, 1975; Siver and Trainor, 1983; Hessen and Van Donk, 1993; Verschoor et al., 2004). Scenedesmus are commonly unicellular in nature, but can produce coenobia of two, four, or eight cells under certain abiotic conditions, such as nutrient limitation (Schubert and Trainor, 1974), light limitation (Steenbergen, 1975) or low temperature (Trainor 1993). Scenedesmus can also form coenobia in response to chemicals released by various cladoceran grazer species (Hessen and Van Donk, 1993; Lürling and Van Donk, 1999; Kyong et al., 2001; Van Donk, 2007), and also from the rotifer Brachionus calyciflorus (Verschoor et al., 2004). The structures of the chemicals released by Daphnia have been described and their origin confirmed, and they have been definitively shown to induce coenobia formation in Scenedesmus (Yasumoto et al., 2005, 2006, 2008a,b). Moreover, larger Scenedesmus coenobia result in lower filtering rates for small D. magna (Hessen and Van Donk, 1993) and lower population growth rates in both D. magna and D. cucullata (Lürling et al., 1997). We therefore refer to the Daphnia chemical cues as kairomones (Brown et al., 1970; Dicke and Sabelis, 1988).

The distribution of colony sizes in a population of Scenedesmus thus depends on both biotic and abiotic factors, offering an opportunity to explore possible interactions between the two. In particular, the designation of colony formation as an “induced defense” may require some qualification, and it is possible that this defense does not fit into discrete “induced” (by the presence of a grazer) or “constitutive” (not specifically induced by the presence of a grazer) categories.

Although the trade-offs associated with coenobia formation are not yet well understood, recent research has begun to address this problem. For example, Scenedesmus acutus has increased sinking rates when in the colonial form, indicating that one cost of coenobia formation may be an increased risk of sinking out of the euphotic zone (Lürling and Van Donk, 2000). Coenobia formation may also decrease surface area and thus the ability to take up nutrients, although these costs may be minimal in high-nutrient environments (Van Donk et al., 2011). Thus, if there is a trade-off between defense and resource acquisition, Scenedesmus can be expected to increase constitutive coenobia formation when nutrients are abundantly available (Van Donk et al., 2011), but form coenobia only in response to grazer kairomones when nutrients are limiting. Finally, the larger particle size of Scenedesmus coenobia may increase grazing risk in the presence of very large zooplankton herbivores, although to our knowledge, no study has addressed this issue.

Here, we investigate colony formation and the intrinsic population growth rate in Scenedesmus acutus (Meyen) in response to resources [a gradient of phosphorus (P) concentration] and grazers [the presence and absence of Daphnia magna (Strauss) kairomones] in a laboratory experiment. We test the hypothesis that colony formation is more costly in a low-resource environment than in a high-resource environment. We predicted that (a) D. magna kairomones would negatively affect S. acutus' intrinsic population growth rate in all P treatments and (b) S. acutus would constitutively form more large coenobia in high-P media than in low-P media in the absence of D. magna kairomones, but that (c) exposure of S. acutus to D. magna kairomones would induce coenobia formation across P treatments (a P × kairomone interaction).

Previous Section
Next Section
METHOD

We conducted a fully randomized, repeated measures factorial experiment crossing three phosphorus (P) treatments with two Daphnia kairomone treatments (Daphnia kairomones present or absent). Each treatment was replicated four times for a total of 24 experimental units. P concentrations were chosen to reflect oligotrophic to mesotrophic conditions in nature (Carlson, 1977; Wetzel, 1983): 0.5, 1.0 and 5.0 µM P.

The experiment was conducted in 200 mL COMBO (Kilham et al., 1998) culture media in 250 mL glass jars. We collected daily data for the duration of the exponential growth phase (8 days in all treatments). The experiment was conducted in October 2010 in the Charles Gilman Biological Laboratory at Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA.

Preparation of stock cultures and experimental culture media
We grew stock cultures of Scenedesmus acutus (University of Texas Culture Collection of Algae UTEX strain 72) in standard (50 µM P) COMBO media in a 20 L glass carboy, aerated to maintain cells in suspension. We maintained this culture at 20°C, illuminated from above with fluorescent grow lights on a 16:8 light:dark cycle.

We cultured Daphnia magna stock (purchased from Carolina Biological Supply, Burlington, NC, USA) at 20°C in standard COMBO media in three, 2 L glass beakers covered with aluminum foil. We fed D. magna with S. acutus at 105 cells mL day−1 (Lürling and Van Donk, 1999), and transferred cultures to fresh media every 7 days.

Experimental procedures
To create the three levels of P, we prepared modified COMBO culture media at 0.5, 1.0 and 5.0 µM P. In COMBO, P is added as K2HPO4, which also provides the necessary potassium (K). In our modified COMBO, we compensated for decreased K by adding 100 µM KCl, assuming the added chloride was not significant (Kilham et al., 1998).

The Daphnia × P treatment reservoirs were maintained in six 1000 mL beakers. At the beginning of the experiment, we added 500 mL of each P level to two beakers each and then added 100 adult D. magna to one randomly selected beaker of each P treatment (creating “+Daphnia” and “control” reservoirs). Throughout the experiment, we fed the D. magna in the reservoirs daily with S. acutus at a rate of 105 cells mL−1 day−1. Scenedesmus acutus was not added to control reservoirs. Every third day, we removed all visible D. magna neonates and carcasses from cultures using an inverted 5 mL serological pipette, recorded natality and mortality and replaced all carcasses with live adult D. magna. We also removed exactly 25 mL of media from each reservoir along with the neonates and carcasses, and replaced this with 25 mL of fresh media at the appropriate P concentration.

Once the Daphnia × P treatment reservoirs had been established for 24 h, we siphoned 100 mL of media from each reservoir into a clean (i.e. acid-washed) 100 mL graduated cylinder and then into a clean 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask capped with a rubber stopper. We replaced the decanted media with fresh media of the appropriate P concentration. The contents of each flask were filtered through a 1.5 µm glass fiber filter (pre-conditioned with fresh media of the appropriate P concentration) into acid-washed, sterile 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks and capped with aluminum foil. These filtrates were then used to initiate the experimental cultures.

We established the 24 separate culture jars with 179 mL modified COMBO media of the appropriate P concentration, 20 mL of the filtrate from the appropriate treatment reservoir and 1 mL concentrated S. acutus inoculum, for a total of 200 mL of medium and a starting cell density of ∼ 51 000 S. acutus cells mL−1. Scenedesmus acutus inocula were obtained from a subsample of stock culture, which had been separated by settling for 24 h and diluted to the proper concentration with Milli-Q (EMD Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA) water to minimize added P. Experimental jars were labeled with a randomly generated four-digit identification code to ensure that samples were processed “blind” with respect to treatment.

The experimental cultures were maintained at 20°C, rotating on a plankton wheel [∼0.9 RPM, 48-container maximum capacity (24 × 2 alignment)] and illuminated from above and below by fluorescent grow lights on a 16:8 light:dark cycle.

We sampled cultures daily at 1800 h. Immediately before sampling, we added 0.4 mL of Lugol's preservative (Lind, 1985) to 24 pre-labeled (date and ID number), 20 mL scintillation vials. We removed each culture jar from the plankton wheel, swirled it manually for 10 s, transferred 10 mL to the sample vial using a 10 mL macropipettor and then capped and replaced the culture jar on the wheel.

After sampling, we prepared fresh filtrates from each of the six Daphnia × P treatment reservoirs as described above. Using the filtrate from the appropriate treatment reservoir, we replaced the 10 mL sample removed previously from each experimental culture jar and returned the jar to the plankton wheel.

Microscopy
We determined S. acutus cell densities using one of two counting devices, depending on cell density. We counted low-density (<105 cells mL−1) samples using a Sedgewick–Rafter cell (1 mm deep, with a 1 mm grid; thus, each square is equal to 0.001 mL of sample) on a Zeiss Axiovert 200 (Carl Zeiss Inc., Germany, 2003) inverted fluorescence microscope at ×320 magnification. When cell densities became too high for counting in the Sedgewick–Rafter cell (∼106 cells mL−1), we used a hemocytometer (0.1 mm deep) on an Olympus CHBS (Olympus Optical Co., Ltd.) compound microscope at ×400 magnification. With either approach, we agitated samples by manually shaking the vial back and forth lightly for 5 s before drawing a subsample, then allowed all subsamples to settle for at least 10 min before counting. For each subsample, we counted no fewer than four entire 1 mm2 grid sections for cell density estimates, and no fewer than 100 aggregates (unicells and colonies of all sizes) in order to obtain a thorough estimate of coenobia size distributions (as in Lürling and Van Donk, 1999).

Our focal response variables were density (cells mL−1), and the proportion of aggregates that were unicells, two-celled coenobia and four-celled coenobia (hereafter, “morphotypes”). We considered other morphotypes inconsequential, as coenobia of three cells never exceeded 5% of aggregates, and coenobia of >4 cells never exceeded 1%.

Statistical analyses
To test for effects of D. magna kairomones and P concentration on population densities (cells mL−1) and on relative abundances of the three predominant morphotypes (unicells, two-celled coenobia and four-celled coenobia) among treatments through time, we used repeated measures analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA) to test for the fixed treatment effects (P concentration and presence of Daphnia kairomones) using PROC MIXED in SAS version 8.2 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) and the AR(1) model (Wolfinger and Chang, 1999). All four response variables were log10-transformed to meet assumptions (Warton and Hui, 2011). Using JMP 8 Statistical Discovery™ software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA., 2008), we estimated the population growth rate (cells cell−1 day−1) for each flask across days 1–8 using simple linear regression on log10-transformed cell densities (cells mL−1), then used fixed-effects multiple analysis of variance (MANOVA), followed by univariate (ANOVA) tests of treatment effects on slopes and intercepts from the fitted growth curve. For all statistical tests, we used α = 0.05 to assess statistical significance and α = 0.10 to assess statistical trends.

Previous Section
Next Section
RESULTS

Scenedesmus densities
Scenedesmus acutus cell densities increased through time, and were affected subtly by D. magna kairomones (Table I; Fig. 1). Densities in +Daphnia treatments generally lagged behind those in controls until late in exponential growth phase (Fig. 1). Although the population growth rate (the slope) did not differ statistically among treatments (Table I), cell densities were ∼50% higher in controls than in +Daphnia treatments across all P treatments on days 5 and 6, and nearly twice as high on day 5 in high-P treatments; control culture densities remained ∼50% higher until day 7 in med.-P treatments (Fig. 1). There was a significant effect of D. magna kairomones, but not P concentration, on the intercepts for the growth rate regressions, reflecting a difference in density on the first sampling date (Table I). All treatments were inoculated from the same S. acutus stock on day 0, so this difference may indicate a difference in growth rate between day 0 and the first sampling date (day 1).

View this table:
In this window In a new window
Table I:
Fixed-effects MANOVA testing for effects of Daphnia kairomones and P concentration on mean slope (intrinsic growth rate) and intercept of log10 (S. acutus cells mL−1) over time (days 1–8)

Fig. 1.
View larger version:
In this page In a new window
Download as PowerPoint Slide
Fig. 1.
Mean S. acutus densities (cells mL−1) over 8 days with filtered D. magna media added (+kairomones) versus with control media added, in (A) low P (0.5 µM), (B) medium P (1.0 µM), and (C) high P conditions (5.0 µM). Bars are ± 1 SE.

Unicells and coenobia formation
Unicells were consistently less abundant in +Daphnia treatments, but the relative differences from controls varied with P concentration and time (Table II; Fig. 2A–C), indicated by a three-way interaction among Daphnia, P concentration and time (Table II). In low P, the relative abundance of unicells doubled in controls, but decreased by ∼50% in +Daphnia treatments by day 8 (Fig. 2A). In medium P, unicells increased from <30% of aggregates to nearly 50% in controls but decreased from >30% to ∼10% in +Daphnia treatments (Fig. 2B). In high-P, unicells decreased by ∼10% in controls and ∼20% in +Daphnia treatments (Fig. 2C).

View this table:
In this window In a new window
Table II:
Repeated measures analysis of variance comparing S. acutus density (log10 [cells mL−1]) and relative abundances of S. acutus morphotypes (log10 transformed) in +Daphnia versus control treatments, and among three phosphorus concentrations over days 1–8 (exponential growth phase)

Fig. 2.
View larger version:
In this page In a new window
Download as PowerPoint Slide
Fig. 2.
The mean proportion of S. acutus cells that were (A–C) unicells, (D–F) two-celled coenobia and (G–I) four-celled coenobia with filtered D. magna media added versus with control media added, in (first column) low P (0.5 µM), (second column), medium P (1.0 µM) and (third column) high P (5.0 µM) conditions. Bars are ± 1 SE.

Trajectories for two-celled coenobia (Fig. 2D–F) varied with Daphnia treatment and time, but not P concentration (all phosphorus effects had P-values >0.17, Table II). Two-celled coenobia initially decreased in relative abundance in all cultures, but began to increase in +Daphnia treatments on day 7 (Table II, Fig. 2D–F). For most of the exponential phase, two-celled coenobia were at lower relative abundance in +Daphnia treatments than in controls.

In many respects, trajectories for four-celled coenobia mirrored those of unicells, changing through time as a function of both Daphnia and P concentration (significant three-way interaction among Daphnia, P concentration and time, Table II). In low-P, four-celled coenobia decreased by ∼50% in controls (Fig. 2G), while in medium-P, four-celled coenobia first increased slightly, then decreased to their starting abundance (∼40%) by day 8 (Fig. 2H). In contrast, four-celled coenobia increased by ∼20% (Fig. 2I).

Previous Section
Next Section
DISCUSSION

This study demonstrates the importance of interactions between biotic and abiotic drivers of phenotypic plasticity in phytoplankton. Scenedesmus acutus exhibited strong phenotypic plasticity in response to both phosphorus concentration and to the presence of Daphnia magna kairomones. Our results indicate that (i) the presence of D. magna kairomones did not affect net growth of S. acutus, consistent with the literature (Lürling, 1998), but did affect S. acutus densities early in exponential phase (Table I); (ii) S. acutus formed more, larger coenobia in the presence of D. magna kairomones, consistent with the literature (Hessen and Van Donk, 1993; Lampert et al., 1994; Lürling and Van Donk, 1999; Kyong et al., 2001; Verschoor et al., 2004); and (iii) high ambient P concentration shifted S. acutus coenobia size distributions in favor of large coenobia, while P limitation has the opposite effect. The strong three-way (Daphnia × P × Time) interaction showed clearly that S. acutus was capable of constitutively forming large coenobia (a defensive morphology) when P was abundantly available, but resorted to coenobia formation as an induced defense when P was limiting.

In this experiment, morphotype distributions shifted toward four-celled coenobia in both +Daphnia and high-P treatments, supporting the hypothesis that colony formation is less costly to Scenedesmus in a favorable abiotic (in this case high-P) environments (Van Donk et al., 2011). In high-P treatments, P was abundant, so the cost of defense was likely low and S. acutus could afford to increase constitutive colony formation as a “just-in-case” strategy, consistent with the literature (Tollrian and Harvell, 1999). Conversely, when P was less available, S. acutus adopted an induced-defense strategy, favoring unicells in the absence of D. magna kairomones and four-celled coenobia in the presence of kairomones. This suggests that colony formation is more costly in a low-P environment. Regardless of P concentration, D. magna kairomones induced greater colony formation, although the difference in colony size distributions between +Daphnia treatments and controls was much smaller in high-P treatments. Thus, colony formation in S. acutus can be considered both an induced and a constitutive defense, depending on P availability. Although exceptions exist, the generality of nutrient effects on colony formation in Scenedesmus sp. appears to extend to other nutrients besides P (Table III).

View this table:
In this window In a new window
Table III:
Studies in which abiotic factors affected Scenedesmus sp. morphology

We note that kairomone effects in +Daphnia treatments could be confounded with effects of P recycling by D. magna in treatment reservoirs. Given the P treatment effects observed in this study, P addition by D. magna could have resulted in coenobia formation in S. acutus if the P concentrations in +Daphnia treatments were significantly altered. However, we believe this effect to be minimal, given the short duration of the experiment, the dilution rate of media in Daphnia reservoirs (20% day−1) and the small volume of treatment medium added daily to treatment jars (5% of total treatment jar volume). Because the Daphnia effect was immediate and consistent across treatments, and more dramatic than the treatment effect of high P concentration on coenobia formation, we interpret the observed Daphnia effect as a kairomone effect. Importantly, even if the observed effect of D. magna treatment media was in part due to P addition by Daphnia, this can still be considered a Daphnia effect, blurring the line between a nutrient and a kairomone, and highlighting the possible importance of nutrient recycling by zooplankton for influencing phytoplankton morphologies in nature.

More studies of interactions between grazer kairomones and various abiotic factors in the induction of defensive traits could shed light on the costs and benefits of induction of those traits. For example, Scenedesmus has highly plastic stoichiometry (Rhee, 1978), but it is unclear how uptake of P and/or N are affected by colony formation; a study of these effects could be highly informative.

The initial 5-day lag in S. acutus growth in response to the presence of Daphnia kairomones is interesting biologically, although it does not directly contradict the results of Lürling (Lürling, 1998), who found that the presence of Daphnia kairomones did not affect net growth during exponential phase. It remains unclear whether the observed lag was an effect of colony formation or a direct response to kairomones. The latter seems more likely, as densities in +Daphnia treatments eventually caught up to those in controls. Alternatively, the initial lag in S. acutus growth in +Daphnia treatments may represent a cost of colony formation, or at least a cost of acclimation to the presence of D. magna kairomones. An initial cost of acclimation (or a change in nutrient uptake or allocation associated with switching to the colonial morph) might explain why S. acutus growth was initially slower in +Daphnia treatments, but eventually caught up to that in controls. We distinguish this cost from the increased sinking rates reported by Lürling and Van Donk (Lürling and Van Donk, 2000), as our treatment cultures were in continuous rotation. Finally, organisms often alter their life histories in response to predator infochemicals (Crowl and Covich, 1990; Stibor, 1992; Weider and Pijanowska, 1993; Riessen, 1999), including phytoplankton that delay reproduction or recruitment from sediments in the presence of grazer infochemicals (Hansson, 1996; Rengefors et al., 1998). In nature, Scenedesmus may suppress growth while grazer populations are high, and then boost reproduction when grazer populations are low. In this experiment, Daphnia in treatment media reservoirs were kept at high density (∼20% of “swarm density” [Malone and McQueen, 1983]). We treated S. acutus in Daphnia treatment cultures with 20 mL of filtered Daphnia media on day 0, followed by 10 mL daily treatments for the remainder of the experiment. Depending on breakdown rates of Daphnia kairomones, S. acutus in Daphnia treatments may have initially suppressed growth in response to the “double dose” of Daphnia kairomones, and then begun to grow exponentially when kairomone concentrations equilibrated at a lower level, likely on day 4 or 5.

Unlike phytoplankton, the interactive effects of biotic and abiotic factors on defense production in terrestrial vascular plants are widely studied, and plant defense theories exist to explain patterns of secondary metabolism and somatic growth (Stamp, 2003). For example, the growth-differentiation balance hypothesis (Loomis, 1932) postulates that in high-resource environments, terrestrial plants should allocate more resources to growth, and should therefore be less well-defended. However, in this study, P concentration had no effect on S. acutus growth during exponential phase growth, and S. acutus was actually better defended in high-P treatments. Thus, applying plant defense theories to the plankton plant–herbivore interactions, including the Daphnia–Scenedesmus interaction, is likely to be challenging, particularly since the biochemical costs of colony formation to Scenedesmus are unknown. More studies testing established plant defense theory in phytoplankton, and the development of general theory of phytoplankton defense, are needed.

Notably, there was no significant effect of D. magna kairomones on S. acutus population growth rate, only initial population size (Table I). The cost of colony formation in terms of lost surface area for nutrient acquisition may therefore be subtle, perhaps due to co-varying traits (e.g. cell size). For example, if high P concentration leads to a decrease in cell size within a larger coenobium (Tillberg and Rowley, 1989), the increased surface to volume ratio of individual cells may in part offset the lost surface area due to coloniality. It is possible that S. acutus suppresses coenobia formation when P-stressed to maximize surface area and thus access to P, while decreased surface area becomes less of a concern in high-P conditions.

Although this study was conducted in closed microcosms, we believe it is a step toward better understanding how biotic and abiotic factors interact to induce defensive traits in phytoplankton. In order to fully understand the effects of nutrients and other factors on phytoplankton trait distributions, field studies relating nutrient concentrations (or other variables) and grazer abundance to changes in phytoplankton morphology are necessary. A modeling experiment testing competitive abilities of the various Scenedesmus morphotypes (after Edwards et al. (2011), but examining colony size instead of/in addition to cell size) may be extremely informative on this topic. Also, this study tested the effects of a single limiting nutrient (P). Crossing various abiotic treatment variables (e.g. C, N, P, temperature, light) with each other and with grazer kairomone treatments may demonstrate additional trade-offs associated with colony formation in Scenedesmus. Effects of grazer kairomones on S. acutus traits such as cell size or cell wall thickness are not yet known, nor are the relationships between those traits and colony size. Understanding how those traits co-vary with colony size in the presence and absence of grazer kairomones may be critical to better understanding the costs and benefits of colony formation. Finally, although Scenedesmus are highly tractable organisms for such studies, opportunities abound for studies of other taxa in both freshwater and marine environments (e.g. Long et al., 2007; Selander et al., 2008, 2011; Lundgren and Granéli, 2010).

The results of this study could have implications for understanding anthropogenic effects on aquatic systems. If this study is consistent with the behavior of Scenedesmus and other algae in nature, excess nutrient loading (eutrophication) may have previously unrecognized implications for species interactions. Specifically, increased concentrations of phosphorus and other nutrients due to runoff from human activities could induce colony formation and morphological changes in Scenedesmus, as well as other phytoplankton, making them more difficult for zooplankton to consume. Furthermore, increased production of constitutive defenses in response to increased resource availability could exacerbate algal blooms caused by anthropogenic eutrophication, as these defenses could diminish the top–down control zooplankton exert on blooms through grazing. Strong effects of abiotic factors on the expression of defensive traits are likely widespread among phytoplankton, and understanding how these effects mediate species interactions is crucial to the study of plankton community ecology.