Sienna_Craig
Anthropology
Culture_Childbirth_Tibet
INTRODUCTION
This article explores the work of culture and
politics in the context of health-development
interventions, through an analysis of a maternalchild
health (MCH) project conceived and executed
in the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR), China. I
have been involved in this work since 2002, 1
 In the
early stages of this work, I was involvedinitially as
an ethnographer. In intervening years, I have served
as a co-researcher and advisory board member of the
US non-governmental organization (NGO) through
which a suite of Tibet-based MCH activities were
supported, until 2008. This article situates this
maternal-child health project—and my involvement
with it—in the context of critical anthropology
of development literature. As many scholars have
shown, development interventions can (intentionally
or unintentionally) render invisible local categories
of meaning and experience or ignore the political
and historical circumstances that have given rise to
the socioeconomic problems “development” aims to
1. I am chair of the One Heart Worldwide Medical Advisory
Board. This article reflects my perspectives and analysis and does
not necessarily reflect the views of the organization.
address (cf. Ferguson 1994, Gupta 1998, Escobar
1995, Fisher 1997). This article takes inspiration
from Pigg’s (1997a, b) insights about the ways healthdevelopment
programs can adopt interpretive lenses
that in essence “create” subject positions such as
“Traditional Birth Attendants” (TBAs) out of more
complex, contested socioeconomic and micropolitical
contexts. Following Pigg, I argue that such
categories primarily serve the needs of governments,
NGOs, and global health institutions. In the process
of planning, justifying, and raising funds for healthdevelopment
interventions—no matter how urgent
the needs, no matter how poignant the stories,
no matter how powerful the statistics—we risk
of essentializing culture and eliding the complex
realities in which people live.
Yet such elision is neither stable nor one-sided.
It is possible to witness and participate in healthdevelopment
“success stories” even when situated
within politically charged environments, and even
though they will likely never fully transcend the
logic of global capitalism (including twenty-first
century philanthropic capitalism and capitalism with
Chinese characteristics, in this case) or the social
politics that rim universalist human rights discourse
(around the fact that scores of women and children
die unnecessarily from complications of childbirth,
in this case). At the core of this essay is a concern
with the realpolitik of health-development agendas
Sienna R. Craig DARTMOUTH COLLEGE
“Not Found in Tibetan Society”:
Culture, Childbirth, and a Politics of
Life on the Roof of the World
This article explores the work of culture and politics in the context of health-development interventions,
through an analysis of a maternal-child health project conceived and executed in the Tibet Autonomous
Region, China. This article illustrates the ways such categories circulate to serve the needs of governmental
and non-governmental organizations, and, in the process, how they run the risk of essentializing culture or
eliding the complex realities in which people live. Yet such elision is neither a given nor one-sided. Rather,
such programs are enmeshed in a realpolitik in places such as Tibet where the trope of “culture” is both
problematic and deeply influential, and where demographics are politicized in particular ways. Healthdevelopment
efforts such as this project illustrate a “politics of life” (Fassin 2007) even as the technocratic
tendencies of development in which such projects are implicated can remove “politics” as a sphere of
discussion or engagement. Even so, such efforts can make a difference in people’s lives and, at the same
time, contribute to a critical, engaged anthropology of global health.
101102 HIMALAYA XXX (1-2) 2010
HEALTH EDUCATION AND RESEARCH IN TIBET
The impetus for the organization in question began in
the late 1990s when the founder visited the TAR as part of
a team conducting reconstructive surgery. During that trip,
the founder, a nurse practitioner with expertise in emergency
obstetrics, heard stories about the difficulties many Tibetan
women face during pregnancy and childbirth, the high rates
of maternal and infant death, and that many Tibetan women
gave birth at home, often alone. The Maternal-Fetal Medicine
Division of the University of Utah Health Sciences Center,
where the founder of this organization was employed, then
initiated a series of trips to the TAR. The team from Utah,
which included high-risk obstetricians and other OB/GYN
experts, laid the foundation for a decade of collaboration; they
were eventually invited by the TAR government to investigate
the MCH situation in Lhasa Prefecture and, in consort with
local partners, plan programs to improve MCH education,
research, and clinical practice.
From the outset, this effort included collaboration
between Tibetan, Chinese, and foreign (mostly US) clinicians
and social scientists. This cross-cultural, multidisciplinary
network was united around the premise that maternalchild
health care could be improved in Tibet, through the
provision of more and better basic prenatal care to pregnant
women, assistance at delivery, antenatal care, and improved
possibilities for referral in emergencies. Health education and
equipment for rural village and township clinics to tertiary
care centers in Lhasa, could contribute to this effort. As many
of the people initially involved in this work were not only
seasoned clinicians but also well-respected researchers, and
since Tibet was “under-researched” in many areas, including
maternal-fetal medicine, there was much to be gained by
developing such programs. Yet how to design and structure
interventions, at what scale, and with what focus, remained
unclear initially. For reasons of geography and politics, Tibet
was not an easy place to work.
At this time, a small yet expanding group of foreign
development organizations were operating in the TAR. The
organizations varied, from Euro-American state development
agencies and INGOs to a private NGOs and philanthropic
organizations. Working in Tibetan areas of China required
each organizations partner with branches of government.
These partnerships and the work contracts they produced
were built on a combination of hard currency (proving that
one had the capital to invest in development activities) and
“soft” social capital and connections. In other words, none
of these development organizations were exclusively nongovernmental,
although some of these organizations operated
under such designations in their country of origin. While
some organizations ran programs on improving health
outcomes (e.g. child malnutrition, safe drinking water, Tibetan
medicine, and sanitation projects), none were exclusively
dedicated to maternal-child health. This fact, combined with
the group from Utah’s ties to a network of Tibetan friends and
colleagues as well as their quite personal realizations about
in places in which the trope of “culture” is problematic and
deeply influential, and where demographics are politicized in
particular ways.
Following Didier Fassin, I argue that such healthdevelopment
efforts illustrate a “politics of life”: a political
process that gives specific value to human life through
the execution of health-development and humanitarian
aid (2007: 500). While connected to Foucaultian ideas
of biopower and governmentality—the regulation of
populations through techniques of power and technologies
of governance, respectively—Fassin’s idea hinges more on
affective ties. Biopower and governmentality are at play
in Tibet, but are often eclipsed by positions that are more
impassioned than rationalistic, more tied to conflicting moral
claims and competing representations of Tibetan culture,
than they are bound simply by bureaucracy or state policy
(Adams 2005). As Ferguson (1994) argues, development’s
technocratic approaches can remove discussions of the politics
of development interventions themselves. Such maneuvers
take on increasing weight, I argue, in places that are overtly
politicized, such as Tibet. Even so, health-development
programs such as the one I describe can make a profound
difference in people’s lives.
This article responds to Janes and Corbett’s call for an
engaged, critical medical anthropology of global health
(2009: 180). My article provides an ethnographic example
of structural inequalities that frame the circumstances under
which many Tibetan women experience pregnancy, birth,
and postpartum life. The program in question is described
in the context of global agendas focused on maternal-child
health (MCH), and within a growing ethnographic literature
that analyzes MCH programs and policies. Next, Pigg’s
critique of the World Health Organization (WHO) Alma Ataera
assertion that TBAs can be “found in most traditional
societies” becomes a springboard to examine the compellingly
inverted Tibetan case—namely, the notion that there are no
traditional birth attendants in Tibetan culture (cf. Pinto 2008:
29). What does this cultural “lack” accomplish, discursively
and pragmatically? How has this presumption—that Tibetan
culture lacks traditional birth attendants—helped to justify
this organization’s work? Where does ethnography fit into
this picture? I explore the politics of demography in Tibet:
representational discourses framing the premise that giving
birth and surviving infancy in Tibetan areas is a risky
proposition. Finally, I show how a moment of crisis—the
2008 Tibetan uprisings and the Chinese state’s response—
have posed radical challenges to this work and pushed
necessary reassessments of what this work is about. As such,
this article illustrates the ways disparities in health outcomes
and the health-development and humanitarian agendas that
crop up to address them cannot escape a politics of life. The
article also provides an example of the complicated practices
of such initiatives, shedding light on the possibilities and
limits for an engaged anthropology of global health.“Not Found in Tibetan Society”/Craig 103
a form of Tibetan suffering—the loss of mothers and wives,
newborns and infants—morphed into an effort to design and
implement a program that focused on unmet MCH needs in
Lhasa Prefecture.
Exploratory collaboration between 1999-2001 took place
through efforts to author a National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and Gates Foundation grant proposal and, when funded, to
begin implementing a research project that focused on maternal
and neonatal outcomes. A University of Utah obstetrician, the
nurse practitioner who founded the organization in question,
and a medical anthropologist who had worked in Tibet for
many years drafted the initial proposal, which suggested the
creation of a Skilled Birth Attendant (SBA) training program
and other health education work, including continuing
medical education for Lhasa-based physicians. As a precursor
to commencing such work, the organization founder and
others from Utah forged institutional partnerships with the
Lhasa Prefecture Health Bureau, the TAR Health Bureau, and
the Mentsikhang (traditional Tibetan medical hospital). In
addition, colleagues from Utah established relationships with
medical institutions in Beijing—a diplomatic process that was
uncharted in the TAR and that required time, good will, and
efforts at cross-cultural communication on all sides.
The group was given permission to work in four counties
in Lhasa Prefecture, selected by TAR government partners.
The concept behind the initial proposal was to implement
SBA trainings and provide technoscientific assistance in one
or two of the four counties and then to compare, over time,
key indicators between these “control” and “intervention”
counties, such as number of prenatal visits, locations and
outcomes of births, etc. However, little baseline data existed
in these areas, particularly with respect to information
about women’s knowledge and experiences, beliefs and
behaviors, surrounding pregnancy and childbirth as well
as socioeconomic possibilities and constraints with respect
to maternal and child health care. As such, ethnographic
interviews were prioritized: interviews and focused
discussions with women in these counties and rural health
care providers. This research commenced in 2002. I became
involved in this project by the fall of that year. Results of this
ethnography are described in Adams et al 2005a. These data
served, in part, as a basis for the SBA curriculum developed
by Tibetan and US clinicians.
By late 2002, the project bifurcated into the NIH/Gatesfunded
clinical research project, whose history and outcomes
are described elsewhere,2
 and the programs and activities of
a newly formed non-governmental organization, OneHeart,
wherein the “heart” initially stood for “Health Education and
Research in Tibet.” Between 2002-2004, OneHeart worked
with its institutional partners, international health care
professionals, and Lhasa-based staff to develop, execute, and
evaluate programs. A four-month SBA training became the
organization’s hallmark. The training was taught collaboratively
2. See Adams et al 2005a, b and 2007; Miller et al 2007, 2009, Tudor
et al 2006.
by US certified nurse midwives and a Tibet-based committee
of biomedical and Tibetan medical physicians. This model
allowed cohorts of government health workers from rural
areas—who had a mandate to assist with MCH care but had
limited training and virtually no support—to benefit from
didactic courses and hands-on internships in Lhasa hospitals.
Other programs included physician trainings taught by OB/
GYNs from the US and geared toward expanding the medical
repertoire and improving skills of Lhasa doctors—the
same people who were also “master trainers” and members
of the organization’s Curriculum Committee. OneHeart
initiated a village outreach program in 2004, co-facilitated
through the Women’s Federation (the rural, gendered arm
of the Communist Party). This program aimed to expand
knowledge about danger signs in pregnancy, encourage birth
preparedness, distribute birth kits, and incorporate SBAs into
home and clinic-based births.
Between 2004-2008, these programs became more
refined and integrated, eventually articulated as a “network
of safety.” This model, guided by the Continuum of Care
(COC) framework, acknowledges the health and well-being
of women, newborns, and children should be managed
comprehensively across levels of care, and across time and
geography, and in ways that are attentive to cultural and
socioeconomic realities (Sines et al 2006). OneHeart’s
work came to include an explicit research component.
Data collection systems were developed in parallel with,
but with support from, prefecture and county-level health
bureaus. Research endeavors included a Center for Disease
Control (CDC)-funded project on the relationship between
nutrition and maternal-child health outcomes and programs
on neonatal resuscitation and birth defects. This period also
saw an increased level of educational exchange between US
and Tibetan collaborators: US-based medical, MPH, and
social science students participated in OneHeart’s activities,
while Tibetan collaborators came to the US for educational
opportunities, facilitated by State Department- and privatelyfunded
support. The joint Tibetan-US team began plans for
a new MCH training center in Lhasa, inaugurated in 2008.
However, the trajectory of OneHeart’s Tibet-based work
changed radically in the wake of the March 2008 protests
in Lhasa and the political activity and state repression to
follow—issues to which I turn below.
OneHeart’s approach in Tibet was in its infancy at the
same time as the United Nations introduced its Millennium
Development Goals. OneHeart’s core mission falls within the
purviews of Goal 3 (promote gender equity and empower
women), Goal 4 (reduce child mortality) and Goal 5
(improve maternal health). OneHeart has “grown up” in an
era of increasing attention to MCH indicators worldwide, a
rise in private, state, and bilateral funding for programs that
focus on women and children, and a rise in prominence of
“Safe Motherhood”—as a strategy, a slogan, a set of policy
guidelines, and a web of individuals and organizations
working across local-to-global scales. The rise of non-104 HIMALAYA XXX (1-2) 2010
often compelled to find individuals within a “community”
who seem capable of meeting such criteria. The problem is,
through the process of locating TBAs, power-laden translations
take place, including a concept Pigg calls “side switching.”
Side switching involves “processes of social differentiation,
placement, and displacement that occur in and through
development activities” (1997a: 260). In Pigg’s ethnography,
we encounter Nepalis who reject the idea of “culturally
appropriate” development and development experts who
pine for a certain kind of “traditional” person to become the
first object and later the socially-modified product of healthoriented
development interventions.
In another article, Pigg (1995) reminds us about the power
dynamics inherent in the types of socio-linguistic and political
translations that make it possible to “find” TBAs in so many
“traditional” societies. These dynamics involve understanding
acts of translation are “as much a matter of social positioning
as it is of language (1995: 47). Acronyms such as TBAs
efface or de-politicize these power relations. Universalizing
principles inherent in much development discourse can
systematically de-contextualize sociocultural experiences
in the course of attempting to account for them. We might
note this as the penchant to display “cultural competence” in
global health work in ways that can lead to profiling patients
and their families. In her analysis of the ways the term sudeni
becomes a gloss for “TBA” in Nepal, Pigg shows how the act
of “finding” TBAs to be recruited for SBA training programs
can actually collapse a range of Nepali women’s knowledge,
social positions, and expertise, co-opting a Nepali linguistic
marker to stand for something that it often does not mean in
the vernacular (1997a: 271).
Pigg’s work encourages a sharp evaluation of how terms
like “traditional” and “indigenous” have been wielded by
anthropologists and development workers alike. Such
terms are wrapped up in the work of anthropology and
development in complex ways. Pigg unravels not only how
and why health-development practitioners are capable of
“finding” all those TBAs, but also why anthropologists critique
these renderings of identity and question the inattention
to power dynamics and social relationships in which the
practices of TBAs are embedded (1997a: 275). Attention is
placed on incommensurability and the power dynamics at
play in the translation of authoritative knowledge (Jeffrey
and Jeffrey 1993). Yet, when faced with evidence that some
rapid efforts at building socio-linguistic bridges across gulfs
of culture, medicine, and power result in health programs
that are “effective” in social, epidemiological and perhaps
even political senses, Pigg asks the question: “Can bad social
analysis result in good development programs?” I continue to
ponder this question, and return to it in the conclusion.
First, though, an important point must be addressed:
namely, in Tibet we are confronted with the inverse of the
truism that TBAs are “found in most traditional societies.”
Studies of Tibetan medicine reveal that this “science of healing”
(gso ba rig pa) includes textual references and pharmacopeia
governmental organizations, private charities, and bilateral
partnerships is part of a larger trend, including the NGOization
of development, the shifting roles of nation-states
and other geopolitical realignments, and the increasing
neoliberalization of the global economy (cf. Igoe and Kelsall
2008). Timing is significant.
Concomitant with this increased transnational attention to
MCH issues, I note an increase in critical development studies
literature on the politics of reproductive health care in the
context of modernity. This work includes engagements with
how regimes of authoritative knowledge play out in healthdevelopment
interventions focused on pregnancy and birth.
It also includes analyses of how biomedical and more local
or “traditional” systems of knowledge around pregnancy and
childbirth become disarticulated, and the social and medical
impacts this can have. Such impacts include increased
medicalization of birth including the devaluation or lack
of attention in health-development programs to the diverse
roles that women play and social categories that women
occupy around pregnancy, birth, and postpartum care (van
Hollen 2002, Gutschow 2010), as well as social hierarchies
in the context of care (Shiffman and Garces de Valle 2006,
Pinto 2008), problems of transport (Davis-Floyd 2003), and
Safe Motherhood interventions (Berry 2010). OneHeart’s
programs were attentive to many of these critiques and caught
up in others.
In Lhasa circa 2002-2004, this convergence of increasing
transnational funding, a focus on SBA/midwife training
programs, and the rollout of Tibet-specific Integrated
Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI) protocols was
notable. At this time, at least seven foreign organizations in
the TAR were working on MCH. Yet OneHeart was the only
organization in the TAR exclusively devoted to these issues.
In concurrent and subsequent years, foreign organizationsponsored
MCH programs commenced in other Tibetan
areas of China. These social facts—increasing national and
global attention to maternal and child health, corresponding
increases in local and regional MCH programs, and
concomitant increases in critical social science exploring the
impacts of such work—are not unique to Tibet. However, the
truism that there are no traditional birth attendants in Tibet is
exceptional—an issue to which I now turn.
 “FOUND IN MOST TRADITIONAL SOCIETIES”
In an essay that bears the same title as this sub-section,
Stacy Leigh Pigg reminds us that no discussion of “beliefs and
behaviors” with respect to health-development programs is
socially neutral. Through her analysis of midwife trainings
and related interventions in Nepal, Pigg examines the ways
such programs (as well as the institutions and individuals that
underwrite them) can adopt specific interpretive lenses that
create categories of being and experience such as “Traditional
Birth Attendants.” If one’s developmentalist mandate is to
fashion a training program for birth attendants attentive to
“local realities” or deemed “culturally sensitive,” then one is “Not Found in Tibetan Society”/Craig 105
on which to draw, which address obstetric and gynecological
issues and, to a lesser extent, children’s illnesses. In practice,
though, Tibetan doctors rarely participate in births. Taboos
around menstrual blood and the polluting effects of
childbirth are realities I have encountered first-hand and have
been documented elsewhere (McGranahan 2010, Rozario
and Samuel 2002, Adams et al 2005a). Qualitative research
conducted in Tibetan areas of China, Nepal, Ladakh, and
Tibetan exile communities in India discuss ritual practices
performed during and after birth and, as such, engage
questions of Tibetan women’s agency and conceptualizations
of pregnancy and birth experiences. However, none mention
a specific category of person known for attending or assisting
birth, and some specifically note this absence (Pordie and
Haricart forthcoming, Vorndran 1999, Chertow 2008,
Gyaltsen et al 2007, Heydon 2011). This absence may reflect
the fact that there exists no commonly identified linguistic
marker for a person who assists with labor and delivery. Some
recent work from Qinghai province indicates this may well
be the case—at least in parts of northeastern Tibet (Tsering
forthcoming).
Regardless of ethnographic “exceptions,” clinically trained
colleagues with whom I worked in the TAR—Tibetans,
Chinese, and foreigners, alike—reiterated this assertion.
At first, I was comfortable with this generalization—a
generalization whose implications, if not its empirical truth, I
am impelled to reexamine now. As Pinto (2008: 32) puts it, I
have begun “to sense that the idea that ‘there are no midwives
here’ offers lack to a situation that is all about abundance.”
But an abundance of what? I argue that it is an abundance
of lived experience around pregnancy and birth, a (relative)
abundance of suffering and loss around these same lived
experiences, and an abundance of discussions about Tibetan
“culture” in health-development programs, such as those
carried out through OneHeart.
The problematic only begins here, though. More prescient
are the suppositions that can follow. One runs the risk
of assuming that this cultural “lack” is somehow causal,
that it can explain the high maternal and infant mortality
experienced across the high Himalaya and Tibetan Plateau.
This acknowledgment is a cautionary tale. As Pigg notes,
“Arguments about differing points of view, grounded in
relativism, slide with alarming ease into highly essentialized
depictions of innate differences. Discussions of local context
are readily reduced to a cataloging of discrete factors or
customs of a “culture” (1997a: 264).3
 Farmer (1999)
echoes these comments when he notes how “culture,” when
combined with a narrow epidemiology, does not adequately
interrogate the structural parameters in which such “cultural”
3. Interestingly, the presence, rather than the absence, of TBAs have
been viewed as a causal factor contributing to high maternal mortality. When
the WHO initially engaged TBAs, they were trained in basic biomedical
obstetrics (Verderese et al 1975). This was followed by a policy shift away
from TBAs and, instead, the characterization of such individuals as obstacles
to the delivery of good care (WHO 1992).
realities play out. This is a “politics of responsibility” in which
tropes of culture and cultural difference can be used to deflect
attention from structural violence and social inequalities
and engage in “blame the victim”-type discursive and policy
practices (Nichter 2008: 135).
On the ground in the TAR, this notion that Tibetans did
not have traditional midwives gave way to a range of other
narratives. For some, it provoked discussions of Tibetan
“backwardness” and how traditional “beliefs” made the
tasks of improving health outcomes among rural Tibetans
difficult.4
 At other times, this lack redoubled a commitment
to “best practices” and improve the “safety” of Tibetan
birthing environments—even though ethnography revealed
that ideas about what “safety” entailed were often contested
(Adams et al 2005a). Sometimes urban Tibetan and Chinese
colleagues voiced such sentiment; other times, foreigners
involved in the project spoke in these terms. When asked
why he was compelled to work with Tibetans on these issues,
one American obstetrician said he was in Tibet to “push
back the tide of ignorance” he saw in Lhasa hospitals and
in county and township clinics. Among some foreigners,
such narratives hinged, at least in private moments, on the
notion that Tibet was in need of “saving” (Adams 2005). I
say all this, but I also acknowledge that my fellow American
collaborators’ positions, while infused with the convictions of
biomedical superiority, were also coupled with a real desire
to provide a “preferential option” (Farmer 1999) for Tibetan
women and children, to address standards of care that might
cause unnecessary harm, and to do so in ways that respected
and listened to Tibetans they worked with.
For Tibetan administrators and clinicians involved
in the project, the positioning of culture was even more
complicated. Part of why TBAs might not be “found” in Tibet
may actually have to do with the problematic nature of “the
traditional” in contemporary China, especially within the
context of a “minority nationality” (C. minzu) with a troubled
political history and for whom religion plays such a powerful
role — as an organizing principle of society and, equally, as
a foil for all that is in need of “liberation” and social reform.
For some of the Tibetan, Chinese, and multi-ethnic doctors
and staff, maternal and child mortality was only “cultural”
inasmuch as this could serve, in sympathetic moments, as a
proxy for the effects of poverty, rural/urban divides, and lack
of education, or, in unsympathetic moments, as a proxy for
stubborn, superstitious streaks within Tibetan consciousness
that refused to be “modernized” in line with Chinese policy.
In Pigg’s terms, side switching occurred here, too.
Beyond this—and to be quite frank—the “social fact”
that Tibetans have no traditional birth attendants served
as a powerful entrée into a much more complex political,
socioeconomic, and historical milieu. Specifically, I note
experiences of political repression and state violence, patterns
of economic exclusion intimately tied up with China’s
4. See Fischer (2008a, b) and Yeh (2007) for accounts of this trope of
“backwardness” in state-driven development discourses in Tibet. 106 HIMALAYA XXX (1-2) 2010
unsterilized knife or feeding infants roasted barley flour
placed Tibetan women and newborns in harm’s way. This
research not only highlighted such points of dissonance, but
also possibilities for cross-cultural synergy around the idea
of “safe” birth which informed program development. Here,
OneHeart’s experiences fall within a tradition of using applied
social science to improve health-development interventions
(cf. Nichter 2008, 1991). Yet, on reflection, while our efforts
to enumerate “beliefs and behaviors” of Tibetan women with
respect to pregnancy and childbirth offered an ethnographic
contribution to a sparse literature and were useful from
a program perspective, they may have contributed, even
inadvertently, to the notion that “Tibetan culture” was a
seriously agentive force with respect to maternal and neonatal
death. It is worth being self-critical about the ways an
ethnographer’s attention to detail can morph into the types of
essentialisms against which Pigg warns. Yet these were not the
only representational discourses at play.
DEMOGRAPHY AS REPRESENTATIONAL DISCOURSE
After more than twenty years of health-development
resources being poured into safe motherhood campaigns
by NGOs, national and regional governments, the WHO
and others, between 350,000 and half a million women still
die each year in the world during pregnancy or childbirth
(Hogan et al 2010, WHO 2007). This roughly translates
into one maternal death every minute—the equivalent of a
jumbo jet filled with people crashing several times daily. the
vast majority of these deaths occur in so-called “developing”
countries. Beyond these trends, mortality rates for delivering
women and newborn children in Tibetan areas of China, as
well as among culturally Tibetan communities in India and
Nepal, are difficult to access, or assess for accuracy. This is
due to the lack of baseline and longitudinal data, as well as
the politics of demographic reporting for this population
(Childs 2008: 196-204, 211-227).
However, for the sake of argument, let us consider that the
maternal mortality rate (MMR) for some regions of the TAR
was estimated to be as high as 400/100,000 in 2002 (Adams
et al. 2005), while in neighboring Qinghai Province the
MMR in 2005 was estimated at 280/100,000 (Gyaltsen et al
2007). In contrast, one Chinese source (Zhang 1997) places
the MMR at 143/100,000 in 1985, 71/100,000 in 1989, and
57/100,000 in 1994. This is compared with the following
MMRs circa 2008 in neighboring countries: 280/100,000 in
Nepal, 40/100,000 in China as a whole, and 17/100,000 in
US (Hogan et al 2010). Some health-development agencies
in Tibetan areas of China have reported as many as 20-30
percent of Tibetan children die within their first 12 months
of life; other statistics put the numbers at approximately 90
neonatal deaths per 1000 live births (TIN 2002). The 1982
Chinese census is likely the first “semi-reasonable” estimate of
IMR of 155/1000, while research based on 1990 census data
put IMRs at between 92-97/1000 (Childs 2008: 196).
These numbers help to make the case for the need to
infrastructural and military investments in Tibetan areas, its
desire to quell ethnically-based social unrest at any cost, and
its visions of state’s growth, including its now well-established
agenda to “develop the West”. These circumstances were
nearly impossible to discuss openly. In contrast, the dearth of
traditional midwives was something around which OneHeart
and its partners could coalesce. The perpetuation of the idea
that Tibetans had no TBAs gained OneHeart traction in China
and abroad with supporters of right motivation, some of
whom had little direct knowledge of Tibet or the politics of
health-development work, but who sought to contribute to a
good cause, and who were move by OneHeart’s founder—her
dedication to this work and her charismatic ability to convey
Tibetan realities.
The ethnographic research we conducted helped diversify
our understanding of Tibetan cultural practices around
pregnancy and childbirth—at least as they articulate in this
area of central Tibet—and to inform program development.
We learned that rural women sometimes deliver in an animal
pen, so as not to offend household protector deities and other
spirits or pollute the hearth. Women we interviewed rarely
prepared a layette. Some said things like “when there is too
much preparation, the baby may die at birth”; for others, this
lack of preparation was simply described in economic terms.
Distances between homes and clinics, lack of knowledge
about the biomedical signs of complicated labor or high
risk pregnancies, a lack of transport, and insufficient money
for such transport or hospital fees all played into decisions
about where and how to give birth. Likewise, women noted
fears—comprehensible in both cultural and epidemiological
terms—about hospitals being places of pollution, death, and
cycles of disease. We learned some health care workers felt
ashamed to assist with birth or they desired to help but felt
completely unqualified to do so. We met some health care
practitioners who had been delivering babies for years, and
who incorporated elements of folk knowledge, biomedicine,
and Tibetan medicine into what they offered women, but who
eschewed the idea they were “birth attendants” per se. We
learned about dietary desires and taboos, and about ideals
related to postpartum recovery (“women should rest for one
month after delivery”) and realities (“I went back to work on
my household’s farm one week after delivery”).
Some aspects of the “beliefs and behaviors” identified
through our ethnography were classified as “unsafe” in
biomedical terms, in that they put women at risk of dying
from what biomedical providers and public health experts
would consider “manageable” complications such as preeclampsia,
sepsis, or postpartum hemorrhage. It is important
to note here, though, that the starting points for management,
from a biomedical perspective, are these complications
themselves. A woman has pre-eclampsia, so we must manage
pre-eclampsia. However, this is not necessarily how women
we interviewed thought about “complications.” Likewise,
from a biomedical perspective, practices such as giving
birth in animal pens, cutting the umbilical cord with an “Not Found in Tibetan Society”/Craig 107
improve MCH care in Tibetan areas. These statistics become
differently meaningful when we consider socioeconomic
causes and conditions that give rise to these realities, and
then work to address these realities. But such statistics
must be contextualized with respect to how these numbers
are produced, and with respect to the demographic politics
regarding Tibetan populations. This politics involves the
Chinese state, exile Tibetan institutions, researchers and
health-development personnel such as those of us involved
in this MCH intervention, and a more public arena in which
popular support for Tibet and Tibetans is voiced.
As Geoff Childs points out in his extensive studies of
fertility, family planning, and demographic change among
Tibetan populations in India, the TAR, and highland Nepal
(2008), one of the biggest problems in discussing Tibetan
mortality rates—or Tibetan demographics generally—is the
dearth of data that predate the 1950s. Historical accounts,
social science research, and limited census data reveal that
Tibetan populations experienced economic hardship during
the commune era (roughly 1973 through the mid 1980s),
which registered as decreases in fertility and life span. The
Great Leap Forward (1958-1961) and the Cultural Revolution
(1966-1976) created hardship that adversely affected the lives
of many Chinese citizens, including Tibetans. The institution
of the Household Responsibility System (T. ‘gan gtsang) in
Tibetan areas beginning in 1980 in the TAR has begun a trend
of steady economic improvements in Tibetan lives (Goldstein
et al 2006, Goldstein, Childs, and Wangdui 2008), even
though most indices of economic growth emerge from state
subsidies that disproportionately benefit economic migrants
as opposed to overall increases in production. With respect to
family structure, Tibetan polygamous kinship systems have
changed over time; there has been an upswing in polyandry
(especially in central Tibet) since the end of the commune era
(Jiao 2002, Goldstein et al 2002). This is significant maternal
and child health in that increased rates of polygamy bear on
which and how many Tibetan women are marrying and/or
giving birth.
With respect to mortality rates, Childs notes, “Virtually
nothing is known about levels of mortality in Tibet prior
to the 1980s” (2008: 196). He explains that pre-1959 IMR
of 430 deaths per 1,000 live births, ritualistically cited by
Chinese sources, is likely due to a “mutant statistic” (2008:
220) in which infant (under 1 year) and child (under 5
years) mortality was combined. IMR figures also show much
variation. Although a Lhasa-based hospital study of maternal
and neonatal outcomes (n=2540) reported a neonatal
mortality rate of 42.9/1000 (i.e., deaths within three months
of birth, Yangzom et al. 2008: 319), sources above suggest
higher rates of infant mortality (i.e., deaths within one year
of birth) throughout rural TAR. Childs notes that between
1989-1999, infant mortality and child mortality rates
declined; maternal mortality also seems to have declined in
the 1990s (2008: 199-200). In addition to the lack of baseline
data, any discussion of mortality must take into account
declines in the total fertility rate (TFR) and increased use of
contraception. Longitudinal data from rural Tibetan villages
show an estimated decline in the TFR from around six births
per woman in 1986 to under three by 1997 (Childs et al
2005:343). In sum, the fertility transition is well underway
among Tibetan exiles and in Tibetan areas of China.
Population demographics for rural culturally Tibetan
areas of Nepal remain most comparable to rural Tibet—areas
where labor demands are great, population density is low,
and family planning services are sparse. In contrast, fertility
rates for Tibetan exiles living in India and those living in more
accessible regions of the TAR have declined in an uncannily
parallel fashion (Childs 2005, Fisher 2008b). This has
occurred despite exile government rhetoric around the need
to grow the Tibetan population, negative moral and karmic
effects of abortion voiced by some Tibetans, and the desire
to regulate fertility as a means of poverty reduction, in line
with state family planning policies in China (Schrempf 2008).
These policies include the highly controversial, if relatively
localized, Chinese state efforts to sterilize Tibetan women
(often after their third child) as part of the implementation of
family planning policies (Goldstein and Beall 1991, Goldstein
et al 2002, Childs 2008: 208), even though the one-child
policy does not apply to minority nationalities officially
allowed 2-3 children. Chinese government statistics and
social science research since the late 1990s report high rates of
contraception use (about 60 percent) with methods including
IUDs, pills, implants, and diaphragms (Childs 2008: 207).
At its most extreme, demographic politics between the
Chinese state and the exile government is one that vacillates
between narratives of cultural genocide on the part of the exile
government, and population growth and health improvement,
on the part of the Chinese state. The latter is tinged with
Malthusian arguments about birth control as a precondition
for economic development and correlations between family
size, Tibetan “backwardness,” and poverty in ways that do
not skillfully account for patterns of subsistence, educational
improvements, and off-farm income earning strategies noted
among many Tibetan populations (Fischer 2008a, Goldstein
et al 2008, Childs 2008: 210). Exile Tibetans tend to argue
that Tibetan populations have been decimated by the Chinese
presence. Yet the Tibetan exile government bases many of its
arguments about the number of people who died as a result
of Chinese “liberation” on data extrapolated from a relatively
small number of personalized, qualitative accounts (Childs
2008: 214-216). Chinese sources, in equally polemical ways,
argue that prior to 1959 Tibetans were poised on the verge
of extinction due to the Lamaist state’s policies of celibate
monasticism, the allowance of polygamy, and the overall lack
of public health. As is often the case with polemics, neither
extreme is reliable. We know that Tibetan populations in
China continue to grow, particularly in rural high-altitude
areas where they have been and remain dominant, even as
patterns of urban socioeconomic exclusion persist (Fischer
2008b). 108 HIMALAYA XXX (1-2) 2010
and technologies. It is fair to say some practices we observed
ethnographically may contribute to high maternal and infant
mortality among Tibetans, it is, again in Farmer’s words,
“immodest” to stop here, when it comes to claims of causality.
We must recognize how structural inequalities figure in the
premature deaths of Tibetan women and children.
Furthermore, if we don’t consider the micro- and macropolitics
of using people’s stories of suffering to promote
awareness about crucial experiences of inequity, and to raise
funds and design programs to help address them, we run the
risk of the “suffering stranger”—a stranger who is marked as
an “other” and further marked by culture—to help galvanize
global health work (Butt 2002). In Leslie Butt’s critique of the
use of short personal narratives of suffering to frame broad
global health issues—a discursive strategy common in the
work of Farmer and his Partners in Health co-founder (and
my college’s current president) Jim Y. Kim –the use of such
stories of suffering and an appeal to universal human rights to
validate broader theoretical claims and activist agendas “can
mask the real absence of the poor and their suffering on the
world stage” (2002: 1).
So, let’s get specific. I argue that early and formative
ethnographic work as well as ongoing program assessments
in Tibet revealed a set of structural and social parameters
that conspire to work against good outcomes for women
and children in Tibet. These parameters are: a) geographic,
with reference to poor roads and other infrastructure, highaltitude,
extreme weather, and limited dietary options; b)
micro-political and micro-economic, with reference to how
patients and health care providers interact, how both embody
and/or resist state policies at a very local level, and how
or if patients can afford health care; c) macro-political and
macro-economic, with respect to the increasing privatization
of health care in China, the dynamics of socioeconomic
exclusion in Tibetan areas, and the risks Tibetans bear in
working with foreign organizations such as OneHeart, even
when these organizations work very hard to eschew any
“political” agendas; and d) cultural, including gender-based
inequalities, lack of education, and aspects of specific cultural
practices that can predispose women and children to poor
health outcomes. Tibetan “culture” is only one piece of the
puzzle.
Consider these experiences. A nomad woman bleeds to
death on the concrete steps of a county hospital for lack of funds
to pay for an emergency cesarean section. This registration
fee, printed up on forms that require a degree of literacy (in
Tibetan and/or Chinese) are beyond the capacity of this nomad
family, linking the fate of this woman to central government
health policy reforms that, since the late 1990s, have shifted
away from socialized medicine toward the privatization of
health care. A Lhasa obstetrician recounts how some Tibetan
women come to her in labor, with stories of financial hardship
or alcoholic, abusive spouses (themselves often subjects of
socioeconomic exclusion) and plead: pu gu me ba so, literally
“unmake” this child. The doctor may proceed with full term
Aside from being interesting indicators, statistics always
encounter issues of validity. Childs notes the Chinese state
“has a less than exemplary reputation for handling empirical
data” (2008: 190). Long-term data gathered by independent
researchers such as Goldstein and Childs are incredibly
valuable yet ultimately limited in scope. Added to issues of
validity are patterns of reporting, or underreporting. Fischer
(2008b) states—and I have experienced first hand—that
infant and maternal deaths are not always reported in official
registers because health care workers fear retribution in the
form of fines or other political-economic punishment if “good”
numbers are not recorded. Household members may underreport
births, deaths, and numbers of children. Even sterilized
women can be considered potentially unreliable “because local
officials tend to inflate figures in order to satisfy government
mandates” (Childs 2008: 207). This statistical landscape—a
political minefield of sorts—leads us to the conclusion that
no account of life and death in Tibetan communities, whether
singular or population-based, is apolitical.
Let us locate this reality within other MCH statistics.
Up to half a million women die each year from pregnancy
related complications. WHO defines maternal mortality as
deaths that result from pregnancy, childbirth, or postpartum
complications; more than 60 percent of these deaths occur
during or just after labor and delivery; over half are viewed as
being caused by manageable complications such as postpartum
bleeding, infections, pregnancy-induced hypertensive
disorders, and obstructed labor (WHO 2007). I qualify this
statement because of the need to consider what causes these
causes. Each year, more than 60 million women worldwide
give birth at home, alone or without skilled care (Sines et al
2006). Governmental and nongovernmental sources report
that 80-90 percent of rural Tibetan women deliver at home. A
female relative, often a mother or mother-in-law, often assists
during childbirth (Gyaltsen et al 2007, Adams et al 2005b).
When it comes to children, each year nearly ten million
children die before their fifth birthday, with more than 40
percent of these deaths occurring in the first four weeks of
life (UNICEF 2008). Most of neonatal deaths occurred due
to asphyxia, preterm delivery, sepsis, and tetanus (Jones et al
2003). Intrapartum-related neonatal deaths (“birth asphyxia”)
are a leading cause of child mortality globally, outnumbering
deaths from malaria (Lawn et al 2009). Birth asphyxia or
“breathlessness” (‘ug pa me ba) as it is described in Tibetan
vernacular, is common.
According to WHO, the most effective ways to decrease
maternal and neonatal mortality is to a) have a skilled birth
attendant (SBA) present at a birth and b) have timely access
to emergency obstetric services. Sidestepping for a moment
the question of what qualifies an attendant as “skilled”
(Gutschow 2010), and the politics of child survival (Justice
2000), meeting either of these parameters is often not
possible in Tibetan communities. To make a Farmer-esque
comment, these are only “manageable” complications if one
has access to medicines, knowledge, transportation resources, “Not Found in Tibetan Society”/Craig 109
abortions, and these events are recorded as stillbirths. A
county-level health official intimates the “official” approved
numbers of neonatal deaths he has been told he can report,
and how this differs from baseline data he’s been collecting as
part of OneHeart’s monitoring and evaluation system. As I
reflect on this reality, I note that these, too, are “arrested” and
“dispossessed” Tibetan histories, though of a different sort
than those of which McGranahan (2010) writes, with respect
to the history of the Tibetan resistance movement.
SPACES OF MANEUVER
I now turn my attention to several of the spaces within
which this project was able to maneuver during its tenure
in the TAR, and what happened therein. By a “space of
maneuver” I mean the places, literal and figurative, in which
health-development work productively, interacts with, and
acts within, the parameters of politics, geography, and culture
in Tibet. How is it that something, which began as a poignant
slogan about saving lives of Tibetan women and children,
transformed into a pragmatic and well received set of
programs in which ethnography existed alongside health care
delivery, clinical research, and continuing medical education?
In what follows, I outline several spaces of maneuver: first,
in the dramatic moments of on the ground intervention
by American clinicians working with OneHeart; second,
through the longue durée of maintaining partnerships with
government officials, and the spaces for policy change (or at
the least critical reflection on state policies) this engendered;
and third, spaces of maneuver that emerged through efforts
at “behavior change.” These latter efforts took seriously
aspects of Tibetan “culture” but also came to understand that
these specific ways of being in the world were flexible and
contingent, bound up with the culture of biomedicine as it
is enacted in places like Tibet, and influenced by the “beliefs
and behaviors” of urban Tibetan doctors and US clinicians.
Although direct intervention in rural deliveries by US
clinicians working with OneHeart was a relatively rare, such
moments of cross-cultural medical encounter did happen,
with range of effects. The project team (comprised of Tibetan
staff and US clinicians on routine visits) was at times called
into a home or a clinic in which a labor was in progress,
and sometimes in trouble. In some cases, the problem was
obstructed delivery or prolonged labor; in other cases, it
was a botched manual removal of a placenta, the signs of
sepsis, or postpartum hemorrhage. In some instances, the
problem could be managed locally. The insertion of American
biomedical expertise into the equation, with locally trained
SBAs assisting, inspired local confidence in the SBAs and in the
program more generally. In other instances, local intervention
was insufficient to save a life, so the US-Tibetan team would
rally financial and logistical support, sometimes bringing a
woman to Lhasa in the back of the program’s hired car. These
spaces of maneuver were dramatic. The founder and other
clinicians sometimes ended up fervently advocating, as only a
foreigner or a high-level Party Cadre could, for an emergency
cesarean section or a blood transfusion for someone who
might otherwise be lost to the sea of maternal mortality
statistics.
In these spaces of maneuver, a politics of life was at work,
as were American and biomedical cultural assumptions and
practices. These direct interventions were not conceived of
as “political” acts, but rather actions to counter a nexus of
structural inequalities and to prevent an unnecessary death.
Yet these moments of foreign biomedical heroism had longerterm
effects, including, but not limited to, new patterns of
(inter)dependency and new desires for similar interventions
in the future. There is a price for, and a currency of, such
actions. Such moral and medical decisions contribute to a
politics of life in that they are explicit statements about the
value of these women and their children, against narratives
about their demise that would, perhaps, be silenced by the
state or chalked up to karma. These acts of skillful means
and compassion ran the risk of reproducing power dynamics
that have so mired and defined “development” over the
years. But such acts also emerged from an iterative process of
building rapport with specific people in specific places over
many years—often a hallmark of anthropological method.
This way of working was, in part, personality-driven and
based on affective ties. Yet these acts of radical intervention
were meaningful in great part because they were coupled
with a long-term commitment to provide structural and
technoscientific inputs and to keep returning to work in a
difficult place. Within the larger programmatic approach to
research and health education, these direct interventions were
respectful, if complicated and political, exchanges.
A second space for maneuver occurred through the
more painstaking process of maintaining partnerships with
government officials. These domains of action took a good
deal of conscious effort and warranted different types of
approaches. They included the creation of new consensus
around what having a “safe” birth meant, what a “skilled”
birth attendant knew, and how she (or, much more rarely,
he) acted. Further methodological questions emerged as we
considered how (or if) to position “culture” in the midst of
structural inequalities experienced on the ground that, in
some cases, were reinforced through government policy or
sub-optimal standards of care. Representational discourses
mingled in compelling ways as the project unfolded. In the
early days, our ethnography produced a range of reasons
why women avoided government health facilities. Program
evaluations and the implementation of several research
projects augmented initial data. We learned that some women
were afraid of being treated roughly at health care facilities:
deemed “dirty” or “backwards” by people whose skills they
did not trust. Others were afraid that the frightening and
painful death that befell a sister, a cousin, an aunt, or snatched
the soul of a newborn, would also become their story or the
story of their child, should they give birth in hospital. Some
stories pointed to the fact that the delivery room, such as it
was, in a township clinic was neither staffed nor stocked with 110 HIMALAYA XXX (1-2) 2010
predicted to be workable in a place like Tibet. This space
of maneuver did not escape and could even reinforce the
valuing of biomedical knowledge—specifically that produced
through the international Safe Motherhood community,
evidence-based obstetrics, and lessons learned from previous
maternal child health-development interventions—over more
localized biomedical practices and forms of Tibetan cultural
and medical knowledge.
Some of the interventions aimed at behavior change
focused on the biomedically defined problem of birth
asphyxia and Tibetan as well as biomedical conceptions
of the types of “pollution” that can negatively impact
birth outcomes. Health care workers and laypeople, alike,
commonly used the euphemism “breathlessness” to describe
children who died soon after birth. Qualitative research,
combined with direct intervention in the form of villagebased
health trainings, reinforced the fact that such concepts
were neither stable nor uniform; they changed once families
and local health workers were exposed to relatively simple
technologies (plastic suction devices) and, in some cases,
new vocabularies, including asphyxia, for deciphering the
outcomes of a birth. Even concepts as central as grib, spiritual
pollution or defilement, which our ethnography showed to
be linked to giving birth in animal pens or other places away
from the hearth, was positively incorporated into homebased
programs. It took no grand cultural leap for families to
imagine the benefits of containing pollution of birth by using
a birth kit: placing a plastic sheet under the laboring woman
and using a disposable, sterile razor blade to cut the umbilical
cord.
Another space for maneuver existed in the issue of
transport in the case of obstetric emergencies and its
relationship to differential ideas of “preparedness” for a
birth. Fears about preparing for a birth, linked to concerns
about jealousy, gossip, and their possibilities of harming
a mother, a fetus, or a newborn were common in many of
the communities in which OneHeart worked. Yet so were
systems of community-based labor, which, combined with
support from Tibetan and foreign OneHeart staff, pushed
a new model of birth preparedness plans that encouraged
people to consider strategies for getting a laboring woman
to a health facility in advance of delivery. The language of
“preparedness” also brought with it new conceptions of
“risk” and causality, in some cases. This, in turn, may have
contributed to an increased number of women referred from
the village or township level straight to Lhasa—essentially
skipping the county level facilities altogether, even though
these were institutions in which OneHeart had also invested
significant material and educational support.
It is important to note that spaces of maneuver did not
simply mean American clinicians coming to Tibet and
introducing new ways of doing things, although at times
they did just this. Spaces of maneuver also surfaced as
Tibetan clinicians struggled with the question of how—or
if—they should incorporate Tibetan medical knowledge
medicines.
Official state policy was pushing women to deliver in
hospitals or clinics, with monetary incentives both at the
household level (in the form of subsidies) and for institutions
(in the form of revenue) to do so. While OneHeart was not
in a position to argue against this policy directly, over time
the organization was able to encourage a reconsideration of
this push toward hospital or clinic-based births through the
evidence of improved home-based outcomes in cases where
a SBA they trained was in attendance. These realities gave
way to a multi-pronged approach that did not preclude home
births, but that also provided techno-scientific inputs—
more comfortable delivery beds, newly painted walls, birth
kits, etc.—to existing rural health care facilities. OneHeart
strengthened (through training and technical inputs) referral
possibilities between rural and urban environments. In this
case, spaces of maneuver included hybrid NGO-government
support for improved rural-to-urban referral services, and a
greater sense among the health care workers who participated
in the OneHeart-led SBA trainings that they would have
follow-up support and opportunities for further education.
Slowly, over a decade of work, the organization was able to
advocate for home-based interventions, rather than push
a strict or normative perspective that uncritically equates
facility-based births with better outcomes. Not only were more
women using health facilities, but the organization had also
succeeded in showing the prefecture-level health authorities
that “normal” deliveries could be successfully managed at
home. As such, the project’s documentation of reasons why
Tibetan women give birth at home has helped to complicate,
if not dispel, vague yet pervasive notions that “superstition”
or “cultural backwardness” was the reasons for reticence to
access hospitals. This, in turn, helped to inform—and, in a
few cases, reform—prefecture-level health policies.
These spaces of maneuver at the policy-level would
not have been possible, I argue, without OneHeart’s direct
investment in Lhasa’s hospitals and in education and overall
life experiences of its practicing physicians. This included
effort on the part of OneHeart to bring key personnel from the
organization’s partner institutions to the US for study tours
and direct experiences of the US health care system, in rural
and urban settings. Here, geographic and social similarities
between Utah and Tibet, for instance, (high altitude
environments with rural populations who, in some cases,
harbor cultural beliefs that might interfere with or complicate
health care delivery) facilitated unexpected understanding
between Tibetan and American clinicians.
The third type of space in which OneHeart endeavored
to maneuver takes us back to this sticky concept of culture,
and ways the organization engaged with local “beliefs and
behaviors”. These spaces of maneuver were structured not
only by official partnerships and the more overt politics of
life in Tibet, but also by US and international obstetrical
“best practices” and previously established parameters for
“what works” in MCH interventions generally and what is “Not Found in Tibetan Society”/Craig 111
into the SBA curriculum. Early iterations of the curriculum
included sections that discussed basic Tibetan medical theory
as well as approaches to embryology. However, the Tibetans
shaping the curriculum eventually chose to limit space in the
curriculum devoted to Tibetan medicine or other concepts
that could be conceived of as overtly “cultural.” They made
this decision in consort with feedback from the first few
cohorts of SBA trainees. The reasons behind this decision
remain complicated, even though Tibetan and US clinicians
tended to discuss these changes as “practical” revisions to
a packed, intellectually demanding program. I argue these
shifts reflect a range of cultural assumptions: assumptions
rooted in the culture(s) of biomedicine and anthropological
assumptions that Tibetan ways of knowing the body,
understanding processes of becoming human, and practicing
medicine matter in the context of health-development work.
Furthermore, these shifts occurred within politically charged
environments that delimited how this program operated.
 Finally, these spaces of maneuver echo another of
Stacey Pigg’s analytical contributions, namely what she calls
the “social production of commensurability” (2001). This
phrase references the ways communicative difficulties are
“resolved” in the process of designing and implementing
health interventions through particular types of language
work. Pigg writes, “This concept is useful for helping us
think about the actual presence of technoscience, including
medicine, in out-of-the-way parts of the world, for it takes
us beyond discussions of systems of knowledge that tend
to come to rest in an overly static, binary and implicitly
hierarchical vocabulary of difference” (2001: 482). She shows
how scientific knowledge produced in one context can come
to be accepted in another, and asks what the consequences
are of these “routinized conceptual paths of connection”
(ibid: 483). Pigg explores how the relationship between
sex and HIV/AIDS come to be understood in Nepal. In the
case of OneHeart’s interventions in Tibet, this production of
commensurability occurred around what having a safe birth
entailed, and, conversely, what to do if things went wrong
during labor and delivery.
CONCLUSION
From 2001-2008, several hundred Tibetan health care
workers received intensive, practical instruction in obstetrics
and gynecology through OneHeart. Many participated in
“refresher” trainings that include opportunities to discuss
tricky deliveries, conduct verbal autopsies, collect and
analyze data, and evaluate problems they have continued
to encounter in an effort to do their jobs well. Tibetan and
US colleagues refines, redesigned, and improved curricular
materials. Although statistics are slippery signifiers, in the
nearly ten years OneHeart worked in two counties in the TAR,
unattended home births dropped from 85 to 20 percent and
newborn deaths dropped from ten to three percent. Indeed,
2008 was the first year on record when the county in which
the organization had been working the longest reported no
maternal deaths.
While small on a global scale, these outcomes are
noteworthy not only because of the difficult physical and
political conditions involved in working in Tibet, but also
because of the overall failure of so much health-development
aid to make a dent in the lives of mothers and children.
With only five years to go before we are supposed to meet
the Millennium Development Goals, we are faced with
assessments such that offered by Larson and Reich (2009:
208), who state that persistently high maternal mortality
statistics “speak to the limits of real progress” with respect
to international efforts aimed at improving health, alleviating
poverty, diminishing gender inequality and promoting
human rights since the 1994 UN Conference on Population
and Development in Cairo.
Unfortunately, none of these positive experiences were
strong enough to stem the exertion of state power in Tibetan
areas of China beginning in spring 2008.Like a number of other
foreign organizations working in Tibetan areas, OneHeart’s
contract was not renewed after March 2008, despite the fact
that Lhasa-based authorities had, just months earlier, actually
requested the organization to expand their programs into
four new counties. Without a contract, OneHeart’s foreign
staff members were required to leave the TAR, the future of
the programs became uncertain, and the Tibetan staff faced a
loss of livelihood. The founder’s quest for answers regarding
why the contract was not renewed led, somewhat predictably,
down a labyrinth of political supposition, insinuation, and
affect between Lhasa and Beijing.
But here is where the story gets even more interesting.
Galvanized by their work and the meaning they found in
it, the organization’s Tibetan staff refused to stop working.
Instead, they formed their own social service organization,
registered with Lhasa authorities, under which they have
continued to run the SBA training and the village-based
community health programs. The very fact that they have
been able to do this speaks to the implicit state approval for
their work; if the political will were not there, this request
for such registration would have been denied. It is no longer
feasible for this new Lhasa-based organization to accept
foreign funds. Instead, they have secured governmental and
private Chinese support, including some from cosmopolitan
Han who have an interest in things Tibetan—yet another
twist on the place of Tibetan “culture” in health-development
work. A developmentalist truism that rarely materializes —
namely that “development” entails foreign “experts” working
themselves out of a job — was an outcome, in part, of acute
political unrest. From the beginning, the Americans and
Tibetans behind the project envisioned a future in which the
programs would be completely Tibetan-run. Politics pushed
the envelope. In spring 2009, the first cohort of SBA trainees
to be instructed by the entirely Tibetan staff commenced;
activities continue to this day. These realities provide strange
yet fitting commentary on the politics of development and of
life, revealing the affective contours of structural inequality, 